---
layout: post
title:  First year review
date:   2015-05-26 13:05:00
---

Intro

Knoydart

Eigg
Introduction
In Summer 2014 Eco Travel Network (ETN) - a limited company based in Wales – started a 2 month trial of the Renault Twizy (Renault, 2014) on the Isle of Eigg as an alternative, low-carbon road transport option (Kidd & Williams, 2014).
The vehicle has been equipped with a GPS device in order to record its movements and use on Eigg. In addition to this, ETN also used diary method to collect some qualitative feedback from each family using the car for a period of one week.

The primary aim of ETN (Co-sponsor of my residency) is to find ways to enable alternative low-energy travel in rural areas, finding out about their design issues and community needs. The other sponsor of this residency is Off the Grid project from the Social Anthropology Department at University of Edinburgh (UoE). Off the Grid is more interested in capturing stories and looking at the concept of mobility from a historical and personal level. Additionally, this research aims to find links and patterns between personal travel and energy consumption. ETN is planning to run a 2 hour focus group to collect some qualitative and quantitative information about Twizy's benefits and drawbacks.

Mobility, as well as any other enquiry within social science, is a very complex topic (Law, 2004). In order to deal with this level of complexity, I need to use multiple research methods and approaches to develop a way to disentangle some of the characteristics, properties and relationships between mobility, community, individuals and energy consumption.

The first obvious method for this enquiry would be Ethnographic qualitative interviews. This method is suitable for capturing and examining thought contexts, feelings and exploring relationships between different aspects of the phenomena (Arksey & Knight, 1999). Whilst the Interview method opens some insights into the phenomena and creates specific realities about the concept of enquiry, it fails to ingrain other details of the context (Bagnoli, 2009; Law, 2004). In addition to the use of this Interview method, other methods such as visual ethnography have been used through this study however the key central method in this research is semi-structured interviews, the detail of which I will explain throughout this essay. I will start with a brief study of mixed methods as a suitable research strategy for this work and then discuss some of my personal observations and experiences of conducting interviews.

This essay aims to use ethnographic face-to-face interview technique in order to reveal the stories and narratives related to individuals involved in the Twizy trial. The primary audience of this essay will be designers and anthropologists who are planning to work with communities around the topic of mobility.
Mixed Methods:
Triangulating data sources and methods for data collection started around 1959, a move initiated by Campell and Fisk in order to minimise the biases that each individual method generates. Originally this approach was more focused on convergence and around 1990 researchers started to mix their methods, in a way that one question or method leads to another instead of using them independently of one another. There are three main strategies for conducting research using mixed methods, Sequential, Concurrent and Transformative. The main difference between each of these methods is when and how they are mixing qualitative and quantitative data collection methods or strategies. In Sequential, the research starts with one method leading to another, for example starting research with a survey and a follow up interview with a smaller number of participants in order to be able to generalise the results of the survey more easily. The concurrent approach, as the name suggests, is when the researcher collects both qualitative and quantitative data at the same time in order to develop a well formed understanding of the problem or research question (Creswell, 2013).
Mobility is a complex area of inquiry and as explained before it requires an advanced mix of methods and strategies in order to be able to project a better light on the concept. Mixed method will provide the ability to mix qualitative and quantitative methods, and this is not limited to the data collection methods, but it means both approaches are being used in tandem so the overall strength of the research will become greater than each individual method (Creswell, 2013).
In this study our aim was to look at the history of mobility on Isle of Eigg and how it has been changed over the years. This research opportunity became available through the Off Grid project, with which I am involved as part of a collaboration between ETN and Isle of Eigg. We used a customised Twizy car, made by Renault as a probe to look at mobility on the island. This trial provided us with an opportunity to be able to speak with individuals on Eigg. The trial designed by ETN used both quantitative and qualitative data collection techniques and strategies. GPS tracker was in place to store the usage data of the car, in addition to a diary technique, so the participants can enter their experience with the car.
Another reason for choosing mixed methods for this study is my personal position in this research. Crouch & Pearce (2012) discuss the importance of the investigators position within the context of the research. Having a background in computer science and being literate in programming languages, it will make it easier to use quantitative approaches to data collection and on the other hand working in the design school as a designer and artist is a factor that allows me to use qualitative methods. Considering these two factors and the nature of the research, mixed methods is the best fit for the purpose of this research.
An further factor to consider is the audience, as mentioned before this research has been funded by ETN and Off Grid project from UoE. This collaboration brings specific data collection needs for each individual partner of the project. ETN is more interested in usage data, GPS data collection and diaries. Their audience are Psychology journals and also publicity for their company, however Off Grid project is based at School of Social Anthropology and therefore they are more keen on Qualitative approaches, such as interviews, image analysis, ethnography and field observations.
Methods
ETN obliged three methods on this study, which are focus groups, diaries and movement tracking.
After providing a brief overview of each of these methods, I will discuss the benefits of using mixed methods to neutralise the biases and issues with some of the methods. I will also discuss some of my personal observations during using each of these methods and how they compared with one another.
Focus Groups, Diary and GIS Tracking:
Focus group is a method to interview a group of at least four people on a specific topic. Originally, focus groups was a popular method amongst researchers working within the marketing, communication and health sectors (Bryman, 2008; Kitzinger, 1995) (for examples, see: Khan & Manderson, 1992; Kitzinger, 1993; Lederman, 1983; Murray et al., 1994).
The main reason to use them is to explore an area of inquiry amongst a community or group of people that is not possible through one-to-one interview. This is done by using open-ended questions among the group and allowing the research participants to discuss and clarify their views on the research topic (Kitzinger, 1995).
The advantages of focus groups are in situations when there is a lack of encouragement amongst individuals to discuss their thoughts individually and also when the researcher is trying to avoid discrimination against people who are illiterate (Kitzinger, 1995). Neither of these scenarios apply to the community I was working with. In this scenario the focus group was primarily a method for the ETN researchers to collect some data under their time limitations and lack of resources. Unfortunately this session did not occur in ways that they've been idealised within the literature (Bryman, 2008). Some of these issues were the difficulty to engage on the topic, dynamics of the room (cold and noisy), and facilitators did not manage to encourage more discussion and it felt more like a round robin session. I will not get into more details and personal observations of the session here as I would like to focus more on interviews and mobile interviews but before speaking about those two, I would like to briefly discuss the diary method that we used during the trial of the Twizy car.
Martyn (2002) discusses the issues and concerns around objectivity, elements that could affect and bias the research such as sponsorship, and the significance of the background of the researcher on the findings. In the context of this inquiry one of the sponsors has a background in Psychology and they also own a business promoting alternate modes of transport, therefore the methods they used within this research were significantly affected by those factors. This significantly affected the initial research strategies and the approach that they have been applied. The use of diaries to collect qualitative data about the experience of the participants seemed like a good approach to collect data, however diary entries show how the style of writing changed and affected after some more respected and active members of the community entered their diaries. The quality of the diary data is also another unsatisfying element about the use of diaries. The tracking data, however, is a very useful source of quantitative information to use in conjunction with interviews and other methods. In addition to these methods I used face to face semi structured interviews along with visual ethnography techniques which I will discuss in the next section.
Interview
Interview is a structured way to have a conversation with a group or individuals about a topic in order to develop a deeper or more detailed understanding of the research questions. Generally they consist of main and follow-up questions and probes (Rubin & Rubin, 2005). In our research the probe was the electric car trial, which gave us a platform and reason to speak with members of the community about their transport, their transport habits and routines.
Standard prior interview processes generally involve recruitment of interviewees, organising an schedule and place for conducting the interview and developing and sending consent forms.
Recruitment
By looking at a small range of articles on the recruitment process it seems recruitment is one of the challenging parts of interview method (for examples, see: Newington & Metcalfe, 2014; McDonald et al., 2006). Some of these difficulties come with the standards for evaluating the interviews, such as size of the sample, the relation between demographics, individual backgrounds and research questions.
Logistical issues are another factor affecting the recruitment process, for example the distance the individuals need to travel, time limits, language barriers and researcher barriers such as resources, time limits and so on.
Working in a small remote community and having only ten days to spend on the island, notifiable number of researchers continuously talking to the community and taking their time for doing a diverse range of research were some of the obstacles in the recruitment process. Fortunately we managed to develop reliable relationships with a few active and respected members of the community which assisted me in the initial stages of recruitment, the probe was another element that helped with the recruitment as people felt more obliged to agree to meet with me.
After arriving on Eigg and not managing to organise any interviews through the online invitation, I followed Katherine Davies (2010) approach in street sampling. I decided to knock on peoples doors and use any available opportunity to speak with them and arrange a time to do the interviews. This approach allowed me to initiate a relationship with the people I was interviewing, whilst also helping me in developing a richer ethnographic observation of the process. This also gave me the opportunity to observe the recruitment phase. By the end of my trip I managed to conduct eleven interviews which was more than half of the individuals who trialed the car. This was however a unique opportunity as winter season decreased the amount of activity on the island and also the number of the researchers in winter according to the locals were far less than other seasons.
Depth, Detail and the practice of Interviewing
As I mentioned earlier the purpose of performing interviews was to assist with the potential biases from diary and focus group data collection methods while gaining deeper and more detailed understanding of the topic. Most of interviews approach the research question from both depth and detail perspective. Detail interviews are more concerned with whys and steps, for example in the context of this research asking participants “How do you plan your journeys on Eigg?” this will provide a general answer that could reveal information about their routines and a more detailed question like “Where do you pick them (members of the community) up from and drop them off at?” will allow the researcher to understand the habits and routines with more detail. These types of questions also provide an opportunity for the researcher to understand the unexpected or find out about minor information that turns out to be substantial to the participants (Rubin & Rubin, 2005).
The questions are attached in Appendix I which shows that they are designed to cover the research aims both in depth and detail. Depth interviews are more involved with the emotions, distinct point of views for instance asking a question such as “How do you travel around the island in different seasons (i.e. winter, spring, summer, autumn?)” will opens the discussion of mobility and its connection with seasonal changes and a more in depth question would be “Do tourists change the way you travel around the island? If so, how?” The “how” and “you” will enrich the researchers understanding on the issue at personal level.
Apart from sampling standards, and recruitment - the interview space and its execution also has various affects on the collected data. Some of these factors are as follows:
The ethnographic observation and interview study process starts long before the actual interview. From the first point of interaction with the interviewees (recruitment phase or even the first time the researched goes to the ethnographic site), to the time that they arrange to meet and the politics of the interview space, body language, background of the researcher and research participants and so on (see: Al-Yateem, 2012; Ortner, 2006). These spaces are very contested and complicated to explore. Al-Yateem (2012) discussed some of these factors, such as the interviewee trying to please the researcher or prevent the interviewer from learning about themselves, and finally the effect that recording has on the interview. Drawing from Rosenberg's work on the concept of self and how we present ourselves, he studied the nature of the concept of self. In his work he distinguishes three different selves: Extant self or the picture we have as how we are, Desired self as the name suggests is the person we desire to be, and finally Presenting self is the way we present ourself in different situations. The arguments about the biases and complexity of the concept of self and critiques of Rosenberg's work are outside the aim of this essay, however it will provide a good framework to discuss multiple selves that are in action post and during an interview. These multiple modes of the self co-inhabit in the space of the interview with the concepts of the collective self and the community's self conscience (see: Zinkin, 2008; Al-Yateem, 2012; Ortner, 2006). The recorder acts an important part of the interviews I conducted. Four out of eleven interviews were very visibly affected by it, as soon as I put the recorder somewhere in between the participant and myself they changed the way they were sitting, body language and tone of their voice changed, it seemed the microphone made the conversation more official, another important affecting variable was the position of the microphone. I noticed that if the microphone is in front of the participants it takes longer for them to get used to its presence. However, these are purely observations and there's not enough empirical data for them to make a statement, as the purpose of the study wasn't directly about the interview techniques and more about the data collection, but these observation help with identifying biases and reliability of the collected data. Some of the participants were showing more positive feedback about their use of the car and their answers to some of the questions and this became more clear through the outer interview conversations, where the microphone wasn't acting any more and my role as a researcher was more floating towards a visitor rather than an investigator. These acting factors, while affecting the interviewee they are also distorting the researcher's self and how they normally behave.
Conclusion
Numerous researchers and academics emphasised the importance of the design of research and how it needs to be tailored to the needs of the investigators, the audience of the field of enquiry, the resources available and so on (for examples, see: Bryman, 2007; Hunter, 2006; Krathwohl, 1993). Study of mobility has very similar conditions in terms of its complexity and the urge to adopt multiple methods of enquiry in order to develop a better understanding of the subject. None of the methods used in this study can guarantee an unbiased outcome of the research, however taking the mixed methods approach will allow multiple spaces of enquiry to exist, which will also contribute a less biased study. In addition to the described method, following Sarah Pink's strategy (2007) in using objects as a medium to study a condition, I used some photographs in order to develop more depth through the research and also the ability to keep a visual record of some of the topics discussed. This was through asking the participants to find old photographs of cars and modes of transport on the island, however this use of visual ethnography was mainly adopted as a guide and assistance to some of the interview questions.
There are extensive amounts of work on the use of visual materials both as a data collection techniques and objects of enquiry within visual anthropology and visual sociology (for examples, see: Collier, 1986; Becker, 1974; Sarah, 2007; Banks, 2001; Laurier & Philo, 2006). One of the strategic plans of this study was to adopt mobile methods following Laurier's work (2006) on video ethnography however, after conducting two interviews using this approach the results were not satisfiable. The main reasons for this failure was that mobile methods need more experienced researchers, knowledge of the landscape and the car itself. In this research the acoustic elements of the car, the landscape and roads of Eigg were not ideal for such methods.
Use of mixed methods in this research seemed to be the best choice for conducting this research however, mixed method is more relevant when there is an existing identified problem within the community that needs to be solved and, in this scenario the community did not have any concern or issues with their transport. There are problems that are challenging the nature and landscape of Eigg such as abandoned cars, but the economical and working conditions on the Island does not allow the introduction of alternative modes of transport, so the transport problem is not something that could be changed independently of other challenges of living off grid. Law (2004) nicely phrased this messiness in his recent work “After Method” where he discusses the complexity of social science research and the multiplicity of modes of existence and how a problem can be viewed from multiple point of views. For example looking at Law's work on Alcoholism and how this condition is being castrated within different disciplines. In medicine the main focus of a GP or doctor is to cure the liver disease and they do not deal with the social, personal and other parts of the story. Very similar conditions exist on Eigg where the community struggles with everyday problems such as lack of jobs. This study recovered some of the overlooked existing transport problems on the island however a deeper and more extensive study is required in order to provide solutions or better descriptions of the mobility on the island.


Zaytoun

Networked journalism, a recent trend through the development of Web 2.0 and 3.0 technologies such as micro-blogging and social media gave birth to a new form of interaction between the traditional notion of journalism and the public (Beckett 2010). The spread of smartphones and Internet to all corners of the world has given individuals a global voice for what they see, hear and observe.

Bradshaw (2012) discusses some of the hidden practices within Data Journalism such as methods that journalists use to filter the data, vast data collection techniques and data mining methods to generate new forms of information from digitised data. The complexity of the practice and issues with data overload in the modern age also brings in concerns about data privileges. For instance, how various kinds of information such as wars, diseases and corruption compete with one another.

The piece ‘Zaytoun’, was created in response to the 50 days war in the Gaza Strip of Occupied Palestine during the summer of 2014. Graphite-based conductive ink on top of an emotive illustration by artist Mina Braun affords the opportunity for direct interaction with the drawing. Touches across the textured surface trigger a change in the capacitance of the circuit, which is detected by the various analogue pins of an Arduino Mega micro controller. When a threshold of electrical current is broken, the program sends text to a pair of thermal receipt printers.

One of the thermal printers prints names of individuals who died during this war and the other prints collected local stories from twitter. The stories included within this work are collected from individuals living inside Gaza strip, Jerusalem and the West Bank, reporting the current crisis. Names of people who lost their lives, during and since the invasion are downloaded periodically from Al-Khabar (Al-Khabar 2014) website which gets the list from Gaza Ministry of Health. In order to capture this data we developed a PHP program that converted and stored it using JSON standard for use within the visualisation.

The illustration consists of families and an olive tree  (see: Mehrpouya, 2014). Olive trees are internationally recognised as a symbol of peace. In Palestine they are also a symbol of unity and the relationship people have with their lands. Not only have the Palestinians been oppressed and forced to give up their lands but also vast numbers of these trees have been bulldozed or moved to occupied lands and inside Israel (See: Khoury 2013, Booth 2014).

The invasion and bombardment of Gaza coincided with the run up to a symposium on the production of data, organised by the research centre for Design Informatics at the University of Edinburgh. Submission of the drawing was not only an opportunity to bring human suffering to the fore in an academic community which can, on occasion, be isolated from the ‘real world’. There was also a desire to preserve the personal nature of the data that major events inevitably generate now.
2 Data, Why Twitter?
Everyday over 95 million messages get shared between users and twitter as a mediator of a real-time information network among all of its users (Huberman et al. 2008). This creates a contested space, with various biases and concerns, for instance institutions who are more code-savvy and have an ability to automate and mass produce tweets. Also individuals with specific political agendas who can create various trends and biased information. The twitter system itself also tends to filter the daily 95 million tweets and tailor them to the interests of the user or perhaps the interests of twitter advertisers. This complexity, while providing an area of uncertainty and a blurred reliability (See: Stephanie 2009, Acar & Muraki 2011), in disastrous situations also allows people to communicate in a more meaningful way with the people from outside and inside their countries (for examples see: Acar & Muraki 2011, Heverin & Zach 2010, Vieweg et al. 2010) .

In this piece we needed to collect information about local stories reported by people directly involved in the disaster and solid numbers and figures which turned out to be a very challenging aspect of this work (For example the #gazaunderattack hashtag over the course of recent Israel election in the past week on average had about 6 thousand tweets per day (Topsy 2015)) As has been the case in the past with 24-hour rolling news, the actual persistence of this public content has been relatively flimsy. Stories and photos, unless recirculated in the ‘traditional media’ or archived by individuals, are difficult to track down after the event. One example is the above hashtag. Researchers were able to periodically scrape tweets from the API and saved over 267,000. However, on a recent search there were only some few hundred reported.
3. Reflection and Discussion:
Following our installation at University of Edinburgh Producing Data Conference, we made some changes to the collected stories of this piece and also some improvements at interaction level.

We did not collect any qualitative or quantitative data about this piece during its installation at the conference nor its installation at Edinburgh college of art except for the thread of printed paper itself that represents the number of times the drawing has been touched.

Over the course of the two installations we found that use of illustration and art as a way to communicate with digital data and numbers will create a very personal and strong link with the observers. We informally interviewed some of the participants at the Producing Data conference and one individual stated that he “never realised the war was still going on” and the majority of observers found the lengthy prints on receipt paper and personal stories very strong and communicative.

We also found that the majority of people who looked at piece did not touch the illustration for reasons such as being scared of damaging the art work or not understanding the dynamics of the interaction. Over the course of two weeks only 65 individuals touched the illustration. The less formal location for display in the Evolution House building may also have contributed to this somewhat. The only direct feedback in the user experience is the sound of the printers triggering. If this is inaudible it is unclear that a touch was successful. For our exhibition in V&A Digital Futures as Part of pre EVA-London conference we are planning to make the interaction part more clear and collect more qualitative feedback.

Conclusion and next steps:

Appendix I - Interview Questions:
Interview Checklist
Each recorded interview will be transcribed and anonymised (as per the consent form). Each interview will aim to provide background and context to people’s experiences of energy, travel and transport on Eigg to help understand engagement with the Twizy.
Questions
Personal Introduction
What do you use the most to move around Eigg now?
Can you tell me something about the history of that vehicle (when you got it, from who, if you had any accidents in it)?
What did you have before that and what made you change?
History (of travel and transport)
How has the way you get around Eigg changed since you have been here
How has your mode of transport across the island changed since you have been here
What are your transport needs?
Roads
How have the roads on Eigg changed since you moved here?
What is the biggest problem with the roads and what could be changed?
Are there places on Eigg you would like to go more often but can’t or don’t? Are there places on Eigg that you don’t want to go?
Seasonality
How do you travel around the island in different seasons (i.e. winter, spring, summer, autumn?)
Do tourists change the way you travel around the island? If so, how?
Landscape
Do you think some modes of transport are more appropriate to Eigg’s landscape?
Routines
How do you plan your journeys on Eigg?
In this household, who does what kind of journey (e.g. pick up groceries from the pier)
Do you try and do more than one task on a journey?
Who do you give lifts to regularly?
Where do you pick them up from and drop them off at?
Do you give more lifts now than in the past?

Public Perceptions
Do you think there is a future for green vehicles like the Twizy in places like Eigg?
What do other people think about green vehicles like this?
What do you imagine these alternative modes of transport might look like in the future?

Check out the [Jekyll docs][jekyll] for more info on how to get the most out of Jekyll. File all bugs/feature requests at [Jekyll’s GitHub repo][jekyll-gh]. If you have questions, you can ask them on [Jekyll’s dedicated Help repository][jekyll-help].

[jekyll]:      http://jekyllrb.com
[jekyll-gh]:   https://github.com/jekyll/jekyll
[jekyll-help]: https://github.com/jekyll/jekyll-help
